Add query structure example (#6994)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _observing-your-data/alerting/dashboards-alerting.md

Introduced 2.9
{: .label .label-purple }

Create, manage, and take action on your alerts in a single, consolidated view and identify and resolve issues quickly through the **Dashboards** application in OpenSearch Dashboards. 

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/alerting-dashboard.png" alt="Example alerting visualization" width="700"

## Getting started 

Before getting started with Alerting in OpenSearch Dashboards, you must have:

- Installed OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards version 2.9 or later. See [Installing OpenSearch]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-opensearch/index/).
- Installed the Alerting, Anomaly Detection, and Notifications Dashboards plugins. See [Managing OpenSearch Dashboards plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/plugins/).
- Started your local environment. The [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home) is read-only, so you should use your local environment to perform the steps in the following tutorials.

## Configuring admin settings

> Users can only access, create, or manage alerts for resources for which they have permissions. Access to alerting dashboards and visualizations is controlled by OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards permissions. 

Reviewer: np: " ... on resources for which they have permissions?

> Users can only access, create, or manage alerts for resources for which they have permissions. Access to alerting dashboards and visualizations is controlled by OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards permissions. 

Author: ```suggestion
Users can only access, create, or manage alerts on resources for which they have permissions. Access to alerting dashboards and visualizations is controlled by OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards permissions. 
```

3. Select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon, then **Alerting** > **Associated monitors**.
4. Choose an alerting monitor from the list. Information such as history, alerts, and associated visualizations is shown within the visualization panel.
5. Unlink or edit a monitor. 
   1. Unlink a monitor from the visualization by selecting the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/link-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="link icon"/>{:/} icon under **Actions**. This only unlinks the monitor from the visualization; it does not delete the monitor.
   2. Edit the monitor's metrics by selecting the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/edit-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="edit icon"/>{:/} icon.

> ## Building alerting quieries

Author: @AWSHurneyt Would you mind reviewing this section for technical accuracy by end of the week? This is to address benchmark study feedback about including alerting query structure examples.

An alerting query consists of the monitor, triggers, and actions: 

- The monitor determines the frequency at which the query is executed. 
- Triggers define the specific conditions that, when met, cause an alert to be raised. 
- Actions specify the notifications that are sent when an alert is triggered. 

The monitor runs the query, triggers evaluate the results for the defined conditions, and actions initiate the specified notifications when those conditions are satisfied. This structure enables you to establish flexible alerting rules that continuously monitor your OpenSearch data and promptly notify you of significant events.

### Alerting query structure

Here is an example of the alerting query structure:

```json
{
  "name": "Query Name",
  "description": "Query Description",
  "schedule": {
    "interval": {
      "period": 10,
      "unit": "MINUTES"
    }
  },
  "trigger": {
    "condition": {
      "script": {
        "source": "
          // Trigger condition logic
        "
      }
    }
  },

>   "input": {

Author: I replaced with the example provided in the link.

- The `trigger` object specifies the conditions that, when met, raise an alert. The condition is defined using a script, which can access the search query results through the `ctx.payload` object.
- The `input` object contains the search query that will be executed by the monitor. The query is defined using [OpenSearch Query DSL]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/) and can include aggregations, filters, and other query components.
- The `actions` array specifies the notifications that are sent when the trigger condition is met. Each action has a type (Slack, email, webhook) and a corresponding configuration object. 

#### Query examples

The following example queries show how you can use the alerting query structure to monitor various metrics and conditions in your OpenSearch data. By adjusting the trigger conditions, input queries, and actions, you can create tailored alerting rules to suit your specific monitoring needs.

**High CPU usage alert**
```json
{
  "name": "High CPU Usage Alert",
  "description": "Alerts when the average CPU usage exceeds 80% in the last hour",
  "schedule": {
    "interval": {
      "period": 1,
      "unit": "HOURS"
    }
  },

>   "trigger": {

Reviewer 2: Similar to the comment above, the `trigger` attribute should be an array called `triggers`; and the trigger object isn't structured correctly.

    "condition": {
      "script": {
        "source": "

>           double avgCpuUsage = ctx.payload.aggregations.avg_cpu_usage.value;

Reviewer 2: This line is slightly off. The results of the monitor execution are stored in the `ctx.results[0]` variable. Below is the corrected example.
```
double avgCpuUsage = ctx.results[0].aggregations.avg_cpu_usage.value;

          return avgCpuUsage > 80;
        "
      }
    }
  },
  "input": {
    "search": {
      "request": {
        "indices": ["system-metrics"],
        "body": {
          "size": 0,
          "aggs": {
            "avg_cpu_usage": {
              "avg": {
                "field": "cpu_usage"
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }

>   },

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, the `input` attribute should be an array called `inputs`; and the search object isn't structured correctly.

  "actions": [
    {
      "name": "Notify on Slack",
      "type": "slack",
      "slack": {
        "message": "High CPU usage detected: {{ctx.payload.aggregations.avg_cpu_usage.value}}%"
      }

>     }

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, the action object isn't structured correctly.

Reviewer 3: @AWSHurneyt Could you provide a working example for this? @vagimeli: Please use the raw/endraw tags when referencing a mustache variable. For example
```
{% raw %}{ "text": "Monitor {{ctx.monitor.name}} just entered alert status. Please investigate the issue. - Trigger: {{ctx.trigger.name}} - Severity: {{ctx.trigger.severity}} - Period start: {{ctx.periodStart}} - Period end: {{ctx.periodEnd}}" }{% endraw %}
```

Reviewer 2: This example has an action with a `message_template` that references mustache variables.
https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/observing-your-data/alerting/api/#bucket-level-monitors

  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Low disk space alert**
```json
{
  "name": "Low Disk Space Alert",
  "description": "Alerts when the available disk space falls below 20%",
  "schedule": {
    "interval": {
      "period": 30,
      "unit": "MINUTES"
    }
  },

>   "trigger": {

Reviewer 2: Similar to the comment above, the `trigger` attribute should be an array called `triggers`; and the trigger object isn't structured correctly.

    "condition": {
      "script": {
        "source": "

>           double diskUsagePercentage = ctx.payload.aggregations.disk_usage_percentage.value;

Reviewer 2: Similar to the comment above, the results of the monitor execution are stored in the `ctx.results[0]` variable.

          return diskUsagePercentage > 80;
        "
      }
    }
  },
  "input": {

>     "search": {

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, the `input` attribute should be an array called `inputs`; and the search object isn't structured correctly.

      "request": {
        "indices": ["system-metrics"],
        "body": {
          "size": 0,
          "aggs": {
            "disk_usage_percentage": {
              "script": {
                "source": "
                  double totalDiskSpace = doc['disk_total'].value;
                  double usedDiskSpace = doc['disk_used'].value;
                  return (usedDiskSpace / totalDiskSpace) * 100;
                "
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  },
  "actions": [
    {
      "name": "Notify on Email",
      "type": "email",
      "email": {
        "to": ["ops@example.com"],
        "subject": "Low Disk Space Alert",
        "message": "Available disk space is below 20%: {{ctx.payload.aggregations.disk_usage_percentage.value}}%"
      }

>     }

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, the action object isn't structured correctly.

  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Viewing alerting events

To view alerting events, follow these steps:

> 1. Open your local instance of OpenSearch Dashboards. This is typically `http://localhost:5601/app/home#/`.

Reviewer 2: The URL listed here isn't necessarily correct. That URL would indicate that the frontend is running on the local machine, which probably isn't going to be the case. Is the URL example needed, or would it make more sense to say something like this?

> 1. Visit the OpenSearch Dashboards page for your cluster. To learn more about installing OpenSearch Dashboards, see [this page](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/index/).

Author: Removed the URL

> 2. Navigate to **Alerting** from the main menu. You should see a list of all the alerting monitors you have configured. Select the monitor for which you want to view alerts.

Reviewer 2: Minor issue, but the homepage for the Alerting plugin shows a list of alerts across all monitors. On that page, there's a tab that will redirect to a list of monitors.

Here's a screenshot of the homepage for reference.
![Screenshot 2024-05-29 at 11 28 19 AM](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/assets/79280347/cdc2f94f-ad98-4b33-a4af-c9b859012e28)

3. In the monitor details view, you'll see several tabs. Select the **Alerts** tab.  
4. Explore events. The **Alerts** tab displays a list of all the alert instances that have been triggered for this monitor. Each alert shows details such as start and end time, status (Active, Acknowledged, Resolved), reason, and severity.
5. Filter and search events based on specific criteria. For example, you can filter alerts by status using the filter dropdown at the top of the alerts table. 

> 6. To view more details about a specific alter instance, select the alert in the table. This opens a flyout panel with additional information such as duration, context, history, and actions taken. 

Reviewer 2: Is `alter` a typo here?

Reviewer 2: Also, the flyout panel is only available from the monitor details for Per document monitors. The flyout is available for other monitor types from the alerting homepage. Here is a screenshot illustrating the kind of info that's displayed. It doesn't currently show things like "history, and actions taken."
![Screenshot 2024-05-29 at 11 43 10 AM](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/assets/79280347/355303ac-ed12-4f6a-926d-843fa737d669)

Introduced 2.9
{: .label .label-purple }

OpenSearch Dashboards offers a unified interface to efficiently create, manage, and respond to alerts within the **Dashboards** application. It enables rapid issue identification and resolution by visualizing alerts and related data on a centralized dashboard.

## Getting started 

Before working with alerting dashboards and visualizations, ensure that you have:

- Installed OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards version 2.9 or later. See [Installing OpenSearch]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-opensearch/index/).
- Installed the Alerting, Anomaly Detection, and Notifications Dashboards plugins. See [Managing OpenSearch Dashboards plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/plugins/).

## Configuring admin settings

> Access to alerting dashboards and visualizations is controlled by OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards permissions. You can only access, create, or manage alerts on resources for which you have appropriate permissions.

Author: ```suggestion
Access to alerting dashboards and visualizations is controlled by OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards permissions. You can only access, create, or manage alerts on resources for which you have appropriate permissions. See [Alerting security](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/observing-your-data/alerting/security/) for information about permissions.
```

The alerting dashboards and visualizations setting is enabled by default and can be configured from **Dashboards Management** > **Advanced Settings** > **Visualization**. 

To disable the setting at the cluster level, set `vis_augmenter.pluginAugmentationEnabled: false` in your `opensearch-dashboards.yml` file. If the setting is disabled, the feature does not appear in the settings pane. 

## General requirements for alerting visualizations

Alerting visualizations are displayed as time-series charts that provide a visual representation of alerts, their status, last updated time, and the reason for the alert.

Consider the following general requirements for setting up or creating alerting visualizations: 

> - The visualization must use the [Vizlib Line Chart](https://documentation.insightsoftware.com/vizlibdocumentation/Content/Library/Line_Chart/Vizlib_Line_Chart_-_Overview.htm) extension.

Author: ```suggestion
- The visualization type must be a line chart.
```

    <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/dashboard-options-context-menu.png" alt="Selecting Alerting from Options dropdown menu within a visualization" width="700"/>

4. From the **Alerting** dropdown menu, select **Add alerting monitor**, as shown in the following image.

    <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/add-monitor.png" alt="Adding an alerting monitor from within a visualization" width="700"/>

5. Enter the monitor details within the **Add alerting monitor** pop-up window and then save the new alerting monitor by selecting the **Create monitor** button, as shown in the following image. A new monitor is now created for the visualization.

    <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/save-new-monitor.png" alt="Saving an alerting monitor from within a visualization" width="700"/>

### Associating monitors

You can associate certain monitor types with a visualization using **Dashboards** instead of the plugin page. This association links the monitor to automatically display alerts on the related visualization chart. 

> To associate a monitor with an alerting visualization, follow these steps: 

Author: ```suggestion
To link a monitor with an alerting visualization, follow these steps: 
```

1. From your visualization, choose the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon on the upper right of the visualization.
2. Select **Associated monitors**.

> 3. From the **Select monitor to associate** dropdown menu, select the monitor to associate to the visualization. Only eligible monitors are listed in the dropdown menu. 

Author: ```suggestion
3. From the **Select monitor to associate** dropdown menu, select the monitor to link to the visualization. Only eligible monitors are listed in the dropdown menu. 
```

4. View the monitor's basic information. To view comprehensive details, select **View monitor page** to open the Alerting plugin page.

> 5. Save the associated monitor by selecting the **Associate monitor** button, as shown in the following image. An existing monitor is now associated with the visualization.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Save the associated monitor by selecting the **Associate monitor** button, as shown in the following image. An existing monitor is now linked to the visualization.
```

##  Configuring alerts through OpenSearch Dashboards

To configure alerts, follow these steps:

1. Open the alerting dashboard. Alerts are indicated on the visualization with a {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/triangle-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="triangle icon"/>{:/} icon. 
2. Hover over the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/triangle-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="triangle icon"/>{:/} icon to view high-level data, such as number of alerts. To investigate alert details, select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/triangle-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="triangle icon"/>{:/} icon to open a flyout with more detailed monitor information. Alternatively, select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon in the visualization panel and choose **View events**.
3. Select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon, then **Alerting** > **Associated monitors**.

> 4. Choose an alerting monitor from the list. Information such as history, alerts, and associated visualizations is shown within the visualization panel.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Choose an alerting monitor from the list. Information such as history, alerts, and linked visualizations is shown within the visualization panel.
```

#### Additional example queries

The following example queries show how you can use the alerting query structure to monitor various metrics and conditions in your OpenSearch data. By adjusting the trigger conditions, input queries, and actions, you can create tailored alerting rules to suit your specific monitoring needs.

**High CPU usage alert**
```json
{
  "name": "High CPU Usage Alert",
  "enabled": true,
  "schedule": {
    "interval": 1,
    "unit": "HOURS"
  },
  "triggers": [
    {
      "condition": {
        "script": {
          "source": "
            double avgCpuUsage = ctx.payload.aggregations.avg_cpu_usage.value;
          "
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "inputs": [
    {
      "search": {
        "indices": ["system-metrics"],
        "body": {
          "size": 0,
          "aggs": {
            "avg_cpu_usage": {
              "avg": {
                "field": "cpu_usage"
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "actions": [
    {
      "name": "Notify on Slack",
      "type": "slack",
      "slack": {

>         "message": "High CPU usage detected: {{ctx.payload.aggregations.avg_cpu_usage.value}}%"

Author: ```suggestion
        "message": "High CPU usage detected: {{"{{raw}}"}}{{ctx.payload.aggregations.avg_cpu_usage.value}}{{"{{endraw}}"}}

```

      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Low disk space alert**
```json
{
  "name": "Low Disk Space Alert",
  "enabled": true,
  "schedule": {
    "interval": 30,
    "unit": "MINUTES"
  },
  "triggers": [
    {
      "condition": {
        "script": {
          "source": "
            double diskUsagePercentage = ctx.payload.aggregations.disk_usage_percentage.value;
            return diskUsagePercentage > 80;
          "
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "inputs": [
    {
      "search": {
        "indices": ["system-metrics"],
        "body": {
          "size": 0,
          "aggs": {
            "disk_usage_percentage": {
              "script": {
                "source": "
                  double totalDiskSpace = doc['disk_total'].value;
                  double usedDiskSpace = doc['disk_used'].value;
                  return (usedDiskSpace / totalDiskSpace) * 100;
                "
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "actions": [
    {
      "name": "Notify on Email",
      "type": "email",
      "email": {
        "to": ["ops@example.com"],
        "subject": "Low Disk Space Alert",

>         "body": "Available disk space is below 20%: {{ctx.payload.aggregations.disk_usage_percentage.value}}%"

Author: ```suggestion
        "body": "Available disk space is below 20%: {% raw %}{{ctx.payload.aggregations.disk_usage_percentage.value}}{% endraw %}%"
```

Introduced 2.9
{: .label .label-purple }

OpenSearch Dashboards offers a unified interface to efficiently create, manage, and respond to alerts within the **Dashboards** application. It enables rapid issue identification and resolution by visualizing alerts and related data on a centralized dashboard.

## Getting started 

Before working with alerting dashboards and visualizations, ensure that you have:

- Installed OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards version 2.9 or later. See [Installing OpenSearch]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-opensearch/index/).

> - Installed the Alerting, Anomaly Detection, and Notifications Dashboards plugins. See [Managing OpenSearch Dashboards plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/plugins/).

Reviewer 3: This plugin comes with the default distribution, right? We can mention that so people don't think they need to install it in all cases.

> - Installed the Alerting, Anomaly Detection, and Notifications Dashboards plugins. See [Managing OpenSearch Dashboards plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/plugins/).

Author: ```suggestion
- Installed the Alerting, Anomaly Detection, and Notifications Dashboards plugins. These plugins are bundled with all OpenSearch distributions except for minimum distribution packages. See [Installing plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/plugins/) and [Managing OpenSearch Dashboards plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/plugins/). 
```

> - Started your local environment. The [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home) is read-only, so you should use your local environment to perform the steps in the following tutorials.

Reviewer 3: I would remove this. I would not prescribe what environment to use. What if you want to test it in production? :)

Author: @AWSHurneyt Do we need to be running a certain version of OpenSearch?

Reviewer 2: The alerting plugin has been available since before OpenSearch 1.0; so the alerting plugin version would just need to match the OpenSearch version.

> - Started your local environment. The [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home) is read-only, so you should use your local environment to perform the steps in the following tutorials.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Configuring admin settings

> Access to alerting dashboards and visualizations is controlled by OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards permissions. You can only access, create, or manage alerts on resources for which you have appropriate permissions.

Reviewer 3: Should we specify more in-depth what permissions are needed exactly? Or remove this.

Author: @AWSHurneyt Please provide feedback on the above question.

Reviewer 2: More information about alerting security can be found here. Would hyperlinking to this page be appropriate?
https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/observing-your-data/alerting/security/

The alerting dashboards and visualizations setting is enabled by default and can be configured from **Dashboards Management** > **Advanced Settings** > **Visualization**. 

To disable the setting at the cluster level, set `vis_augmenter.pluginAugmentationEnabled: false` in your `opensearch-dashboards.yml` file. If the setting is disabled, the feature does not appear in the settings pane. 

## General requirements for alerting visualizations

Alerting visualizations are displayed as time-series charts that provide a visual representation of alerts, their status, last updated time, and the reason for the alert.

Consider the following general requirements for setting up or creating alerting visualizations: 

> - The visualization must use the [Vizlib Line Chart](https://documentation.insightsoftware.com/vizlibdocumentation/Content/Library/Line_Chart/Vizlib_Line_Chart_-_Overview.htm) extension.

Reviewer 3: Should we add a little more information about this requirement? Is there any special setup needed on the client side?

Author: @AWSHurneyt Please provide feedback on the above question.

Reviewer 2: @lezzago this question seems related to the feature anywhere visualizations. Could you comment?

Reviewer 4: @vagimeli these are the normal line charts. Vizlib is mentioned because it is the visualization library behind rendering them. There should be no need to add more information about it. We can even remove the `Vizlib` name since it might add more confusion to the user.

- The visualization must not have non-Y-axis metric aggregation types.
- The visualization must use the date histogram aggregation type for the X-axis bucket.

> - The visualization must have an X-axis on the bottom.

Author: ```suggestion
- The visualization must have an X-axis.
```

> - The visualization must have an X-axis on the bottom.

Reviewer 3: On the bottom as opposed to where?

- The visualization must define one X-axis aggregation bucket.
- The visualization must have a valid time-based X-axis.
- You can display up to 10 metric on the chart, with each series shown as a line.

## Creating or associating alerting monitors from within visualizations

> To create a monitor through a visualization, you have two options: create a new monitor or associate an existing monitor. Choose the option that meets your use case.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create a monitor through a visualization, you have two options: create a new monitor or associate an existing monitor with a visualization. Choose the option that meets your use case.
```

You can only create [per query and per bucket monitors]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/alerting/per-query-bucket-monitors/) from within visualizations.
{: .note}

### Creating monitors

Follow these steps to create an alerting monitor:

1. Before creating a new monitor, save your dashboard. If you are unfamiliar with saving dashboards, see [Saving dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/dashboard/index/#saving-dashboards).
2. From your dashboard, select the visualization from which you want to create an alert. 
3. Select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon on the upper-right of the visualization and then select **Alerting** from the **Options** dropdown menu, as shown in the following image.

    <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/dashboard-options-context-menu.png" alt="Selecting Alerting from Options dropdown menu within a visualization" width="700"/>

4. From the **Alerting** dropdown menu, select **Add alerting monitor**, as shown in the following image.

>     <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/add-monitor.png" alt="Adding an alerting monitor from within a visualization" width="700"/>

Reviewer 3: Should we box only alerting in red and not both alerting and anomaly detection?

Author: Revised

Author: Removed images per writing style guidelines.

5. Enter the monitor details within the **Add alerting monitor** pop-up window and then save the new alerting monitor by selecting the **Create monitor** button, as shown in the following image. A new monitor is now created for the visualization.

    <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/save-new-monitor.png" alt="Saving an alerting monitor from within a visualization" width="700"/>

### Associating monitors

> You can associate certain monitor types with a visualization using **Dashboards** instead of the plugin page. This association links the monitor to automatically display alerts on the related visualization chart. 

Reviewer 3: What's "plugin page"?

Author: ```suggestion
You can associate certain monitor types with a visualization using **Dashboards** instead of through **OpenSearch Plugins Alerting**. This association links the monitor to automatically display alerts on the related visualization chart. 
```

2. Hover over the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/triangle-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="triangle icon"/>{:/} icon to view high-level data, such as number of alerts. To investigate alert details, select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/triangle-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="triangle icon"/>{:/} icon to open a flyout with more detailed monitor information. Alternatively, select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon in the visualization panel and choose **View events**.
3. Select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon, then **Alerting** > **Associated monitors**.
4. Choose an alerting monitor from the list. Information such as history, alerts, and associated visualizations is shown within the visualization panel.
5. Unlink or edit a monitor. 

>    1. Unlink a monitor from the visualization by selecting the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/link-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="link icon"/>{:/} icon under **Actions**. This only unlinks the monitor from the visualization; it does not delete the monitor.

Reviewer 3: Would it be better to use parallel verbs? associate/disassociate or link/unlink?

Author: Revised.

Introduced 2.9
{: .label .label-purple }

> Create, manage, and take action on your alerts in a single, consolidated view and identify and resolve issues quickly through the **Dashboards** application in OpenSearch Dashboards. 

Author: Is it the Dashboards application under OpenSearch Dashboards or under Observability?

Reviewer 4: This is the dashboard under OpenSearch Dashboards.

> <img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//images/dashboards/dashboards-app.png" alt="Alerting interface in OpenSearch Dashboards" width="250"/>

Author: Note to self: Add an image showing an alerting visualization.

Author: SME: Do we have example alerting dashboards and visualizations? Can I access them through the playground, or do I need a test environment?

Reviewer 4: Can we reuse the old image? This cannot be accessed through playground

Consider the following requirements when setting up or creating alerting visualizations: 

- The visualization must be a [Vizlib line chart](https://community.vizlib.com/support/solutions/articles/35000107262-vizlib-line-chart-introduction).
- The visualization must contain at least a Y-axis metric aggregation.
- The visualization must not have non-Y-axis metric aggregation types.
- The visualization must use the date histogram aggregation type for the X-axis bucket.
- The visualization must have an X-axis on the bottom.
- The visualization must define one X-axis aggregation bucket.
- The visualization must have a valid time-based X-axis.

## Creating alerting monitors from within visualizations

By default, when you begin to create an alert monitor workflow using OpenSearch Dashboards, you are presented with a menu-driven interface. This interface provides a range of options that are displayed in full screen, in pop-ups, in pull-downs, or in dropdowns. These options are used to define the metrics that can be monitored, set thresholds, customize triggers that automate workflows, and generate actions when conditions are met. 

> You can only create [per query and per bucket monitors]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}observing-your-data/alerting/per-query-bucket-monitors/) from within OpenSearch Dashboards. All other monitor types require configuration at the cluster-level.

Author: Is this an accurate statement?

3. Select the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ellipsis-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="ellipsis icon"/>{:/} icon, then **Alerting** > **Associated monitors**.
4. Choose an alerting monitor from the list. Information such as history, alerts, and associated visualizations is shown within the visualization panel.
5. Unlink or edit a monitor. 
   1. Unlink a monitor from the visualization by selecting the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/link-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="link icon"/>{:/} icon under **Actions**. This only unlinks the monitor from the visualization; it does not delete the monitor.
   2. Edit the monitor's metrics by selecting the {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/edit-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="edit icon"/>{:/} icon.

## Building alerting quieries

> 

Author: @lezzago I used Amazon Q to generate a query example. Will you review and let me know if this output is accurate to an OpenSearch developer? Also, if you have a more appropriate example, please provide. Thank you.

<SME: Please provide an example query that can be input using OpenSearch Dashboards. What are the steps the user will follow?>

An alerting query consists of the monitor, triggers, and actions. The monitor determines the frequency at which the query is executed. Triggers define the specific conditions that, when met, cause an alert to be raised. Actions specify the notifications that are sent when an alert is triggered. The monitor runs the query, triggers evaluate the results for the defined conditions, and actions initiate the specified notifications when those conditions are satisfied. This structure enables you to establish flexible alerting rules that continuously monitor your OpenSearch data and promptly notify you of significant events.

The following is an example query:

<SME: insert example query>

> 

Author: @lezzago Please review and verify this code example. Please replace if necessary.

> ## Viewing events

Author: @lezzago What aspects of this topic are key for a developer to know?

## Getting started 

Before getting started with Alerting in OpenSearch Dashboards, you must have:

- Installed OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards version 2.9 or later. See [Installing OpenSearch]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-opensearch/index/).
- Installed the Alerting, Anomaly Detection, and Notifications Dashboards plugins. See [Managing OpenSearch Dashboards plugins]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/plugins/).
- Started your local environment. The [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home) is read-only, so you should use your local environment to perform the steps in the following tutorials.

## Configuring admin settings

Users can only access, create, or manage alerts for resources for which they have permissions. Access to alerting dashboards and visualizations is controlled by OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards permissions. 

The alerting dashboards and visualizations setting is enabled by default and is configurable from within **Dashboards Management** > **Advanced Settings** > **Visualization**. If the setting is disabled, the feature does not appear in the settings pane. 

> To disable the setting at the cluster level, set `vis_augmenter.pluginAugmentationEnabled: false` in your `opensearch-dashboards.yml` file.

Author: SME: Is this the correct setting?

Reviewer 4: Yes

Consider the following requirements when setting up or creating alerting visualizations: 

- The visualization must be a [Vizlib line chart](https://community.vizlib.com/support/solutions/articles/35000107262-vizlib-line-chart-introduction).
- The visualization must contain at least a Y-axis metric aggregation.
- The visualization must not have non-Y-axis metric aggregation types.
- The visualization must use the date histogram aggregation type for the X-axis bucket.
- The visualization must have an X-axis on the bottom.
- The visualization must define one X-axis aggregation bucket.
- The visualization must have a valid time-based X-axis.

## Creating alerting monitors from within visualizations

By default, when you begin to create an alert monitor workflow using OpenSearch Dashboards, you are presented with a menu-driven interface. This interface provides a range of options that are displayed in full screen, in pop-ups, in pull-downs, or in dropdowns. These options are used to define the metrics that can be monitored, set thresholds, customize triggers that automate workflows, and generate actions when conditions are met. 

> You can only create [per query and per bucket monitors]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/alerting/per-query-bucket-monitors/) from within visualizations.

Author: SME: Is this still the case?

Reviewer 4: Yes

{: .note}

To create a monitor from within a visualization, follow these steps:

1. Save your dashboard. If you are unfamiliar with saving dashboards, see [Saving dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/dashboard/index/#saving-dashboards).
2. Select **Alerting** from the **Options** dropdown menu.
3. 

> 

Author: SME: Do you have a test environment I can use to write a tutorial. I'm unable to test these steps through my local or OpenSearch Playground.

Reviewer: yes, can provide an instance of OpenSearch 2.14 to test the changes

## Creating alerting monitors

By default, when you begin to [create an alert monitor]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/alerting/index/#creating-an-alert-monitor) workflow using the Dashboard interface, you are presented with a menu-driven interface. This interface provides a range of options that are displayed in full screen, in pop-ups, in pull-downs, or in dropdowns. They allow you to define the metrics that can be monitored, set thresholds, customize triggers that automate workflows, and generate actions when conditions are met. 

> Currently, you can only create [per query monitors]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/alerting/monitors/).

Author: Is this still a limitation? Is this only a limitation in OpenSearch Dashboards, not OpenSearch core?
